---
title: "The Ecosystem Moisture Stress Index"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-05-27-madrean
venue: "Madrean Conference"
date: 2018-05-17
location: "Tucson, AZ"
---

Talk given at the [Madrean Conference](https://www.skyislandalliance.org/madrean2018/) in Tucson AZ.

Co-authored with Stephen Yool and Donald Falk.

##### Abstract

Measuring ecosystem phenology via remote sensing enables prediction of risk factors related to disturbance 
and overall ecosystem health. For example, estimating the (1) risk and potential severity of future wildfires, 
(2) likelihood of an insect or disease outbreak, or (3) severity of drought morbidity and mortality, are each 
informed variously by antecedent weather conditions and the physical characteristics of the organisms 
phenotypes, as measured from earth observing systems (EOS). Fuel Moisture Stress Index (FMSI) was first 
proposed by Yool (2001), as a means of measuring the variation in live fuel moisture and thus its relative 
rigor or stress. We provide an empirical basis for FMSI, in context, with EOS data from the past 40 years. FMSI 
is derived using the formula for the standard score, or z-score. It is computed using the pixel's NDVI recorded 
for a given time step/period in a given year, and the NDVI mean and NDVI standard deviation for the same time 
step/period across the entire time series. Tracking the FMSI for each year for a given pixel's 'phenoperiod' 
roughly yields, with some statistical rigor, interannual trends in (as we like to say) 'climate forcing' and are 
amenable to inferential analyses. Prediction of potential fire behavior from remotely sensed imagery is an 
essential task for fire managers. FMSI could be used to assess the level of local drying in live vegetation 
which contributes to the ERC and potential flammability of the landscape in near real time. Utilizing a publicly 
available cloud computing service, Google Earth Engine, and a version control system, Github, users can repeat 
our analyses or calculate FMSI anywhere else globally within the time period of the reference EOS satellite 
platforms at no cost.

[Link to presentation](https://prezi.com/view/nmHdxsYZFBuZCfupeMH4/)

Link to code hosted on [Github](https://github.com/tyson-swetnam/emsi)
